Added Theia project goals (#280)
eclipse-theia/theia-website: src/docs/project_goals.md

---
title: Project Goals
---

# Strategic Goals of Eclipse Theia

This section describes the overall goals of the Eclipse Theia project.

> ## Eclipse Theia mission statement: A framework for building tools and IDEs based on web technologies

Reviewer: Should this header be removed? It currently looks odd since it has no content:

<img width="1043" alt="Screen Shot 2022-03-15 at 5 37 34 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40359487/158477435-f0001b99-1b8c-4d39-99c8-7e247adf2b28.png">

Author: It is the mission statement, so I wanted it to be big

Reviewer: The problem is that it has the same header style as other subtitles so it seems out of place.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Vince, we should probably make it stand out a bit. Maybe add a `font-weight: bold` to make it clear, that it's not an actual header?

Author: done

## An Open, Flexible and Extensible Tool Platform

The goal of the Eclipse Theia project is to provide a platform for efficiently developing tools and IDEs based on a modern web technology stack. The primary target group for Theia is developers implementing a custom tool for end users. As Theia-based products are typically customized, branded and labeled by its adopters, the actual end users may not even be aware of the Theia project they are using under the hood. Therefore, end users are only an indirect secondary target group of Theia. 

## Desktop & Browser, Local & Remote (Cloud)

Tools and IDEs built on Theia can run as desktop applications or in the browser. The backend of Theia can run locally (for the desktop case) or as a remote service in the cloud. Both variants currently have an equal priority.

## Platform for IDEs and Tools

> Theia is targeted at building a variety of custom tools. Prominent examples of Theia-based products include IDE's, but Theia also explicitly targets tools that do not focus on textual input/editors or software development. Thus, Theia's scope also included diagram editors or form-based UI. The Theia platform hence covers the typical application scenarios of the Eclipse rich-client platform (Eclipse RCP). As a consequence, the platform aims at making as few assumptions as possible about what adopters might want to build with Theia. It explicitly allows deviation from the standard workbench layout and the removal of all default features.

Reviewer: minor: please add a `newline` after the header.

## Basic Workbench Frame

Theia provides a workbench frame, i.e., a window management system permitting the display of views, editors, and menus and makes available tools and interactions allowing the user to modify of the window layout, trigger commands, and use key bindings and other concepts known from a desktop tool such as drag and drop.

> ## Reusable Common Tool Features

Reviewer: minor: we might want a better title for this section.

Author: Do you have a suggestion?

Reviewer: I'm not sure, perhaps `Reusable and Extensible Components`? If I understand correctly you're trying to describe how extensions which contribute functionality to the framework can be re-used across different products and can be extended to suit an application's potentially unique requirements. I did not understand the use of "tool features" in this context.

Author: Hmm, I am not sure about this. I personally find the fact that the platform provides features that you can resue important enough for a dedicated point. It is one of the core motivations to use a platform. Need a file explorer in your tool? Get it by just reusing it! So I would not mix "extensibility and adaptability" (section below) into this section.

> Theia optionally provides common tool features as components to be reused by adopters. Common features are generic so that may be reused in several tools. Examples for these common tool features include a file explorer, Git support and a code editor.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the content here, we might want to call them common components which offer functionality that can be re-used across the application and extended. "Common tool features" sounds a little odd.

Author: I would claim that most features the Theia platform provides and will provide are common tool features and this is the focus. "common components which offer functionality that can be re-used across the application " seems to broad for me

Reviewer: I guess I was just confused as to calling the components or views "tools", but if you feel like it's fine then I won't object :)

## Extensibility and Adaptability

> Theia is an extensible and adaptable framework. Extensibility in this context means that you can easily add new features to a product built on the Theia platform (including UI and backend functionality). These new features can either be provided by the Theia project itself (common features), by other projects (e.g. Eclipse GLSP) or be custom features that are developed by an adopter. Adaptable in this context means that the workbench and all common features that are provided by the Theia project can be customized and adapted to project-specific needs. This includes changing or removing existing features and accommodating the look and feel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Theia is an extensible and adaptable framework. Extensibility in this context means that you can easily add new features to a product built on the Theia platform (including UI and backend functionality). These new features can either be provided by the Theia project itself (common features), by other projects (e.g. Eclipse GLSP) or be custom features that are developed by an adopter. Adaptable in this context means that the workbench and all common features that are provided by the Theia project can be customized and adapted to project-specific needs. This includes changing or removing existing features and adjusting the look and feel.
```

> ## VS Code compatibility

Reviewer: minor:

```suggestion
## VS Code Compatibility
```

Theia provides the ability to host VS Code extensions. This allows adopters to benefit from features that are provided as VS Code extensions and make them part of their tool offering. It also allows end users of Theia-based tools to install additional features, if the adopter providing a tool allows users to do so. When applicable, the default Theia UX aligns with the VS Code UI, although adopters can deviate from this.

> ## Use standards and don’t reinvent the wheel

Reviewer: minor: to align with other titles (capitalized first letters), we might want to find a shorter title for this section.

Author: capitalized it, if you have an idea for a better title, please suggest. This was actually under discussion before and we ended upt with this long title to make 100% sure what we mean (it is actually kind of two things that are heavily related)

Reviewer: Keeping it like you have it but capitalized seems good to me :+1:

> Theia uses/reuses industrial standard technologies and practices whenever applicable. This keeps the scope of the project minimal and decreases the maintenance cost. This applies to used frameworks, development tools, but also to general concepts such as UX.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Theia uses/reuses industrial standard technologies and practices whenever applicable. This keeps the scope of the project minimal and decreases the maintenance cost. This applies to the use of frameworks and development tools as well as to general concepts such as UX.
```

## Product Templates

> The Eclipse Theia project does not primarily aim at providing products for end users, but focuses on offering a platform for building products. However, the project provides product templates, a.k.a. “Blueprints”. These blueprints serve two purposes: First, they allow to consume example Theia-based products from the view point of an end user, which enables them to evaluate the underlying platform without first creating a product based on it. Second, the blueprints serve as templates to create custom products. Therefore, the template products contain documentation on how to customize them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Eclipse Theia project does not primarily aim to provide products for end users but focuses on offering a platform for building products. However, the project provides product templates, a.k.a. “Blueprints”. These blueprints serve two purposes. First, they allow adopters to consume example Theia-based products from the view point of an end user, which enables them to evaluate the underlying platform without first creating a product based on it. Second, the blueprints serve as templates to create custom products. Therefore, the template products contain documentation on how to customize them.
```

## Open and Vendor Neutral Governance

> Eclipse Theia is an open and vendor neutral project with a diverse community of contributors from large corporations down to small companies and even individual developers . This diverse and steadily growing community is a stable base for the ongoing development of additional features and solid maintenance of existing functionality based on a broad and balanced view on the requirements put forward by the Theia adopters. The commercial-friendly licensing and the rigorous underlying IP management ensures that adopters can safely build commercial and internal products based on Theia. Project communication is open and transparent and welcomes new adopters by keeping the barriers of contribution as low as possible. Decisions in the project are based on the principle of meritocracy meaning that the weight of contributors in decisions is solely based on their achievements for the project as recognized by their peers. This provides an important incentive for contributors to make contributions. The open governance and diverse community of Theia is one of its strongest assets for its mid- to long-term evolution and viability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Eclipse Theia is an open and vendor-neutral project with a diverse community of contributors from large corporations down to small companies and even individual developers . This diverse and steadily growing community is a stable base for the ongoing development of additional features and maintenance of existing functionality based on a broad and balanced view of the requirements put forward by the Theia adopters. The commercial-friendly licensing and the rigorous underlying IP management ensures that adopters can safely build commercial and internal products based on Theia. Project communication is open and transparent and welcomes new adopters by keeping the barriers of contribution as low as possible. Decisions in the project are based on the principle of meritocracy meaning that the weight of contributors in decisions is solely based on their achievements for the project as recognized by their peers. This provides an important incentive for contributors to make contributions. The open governance and diverse community of Theia is one of its strongest assets for its mid- to long-term evolution and viability.
```

> Eclipse Theia is an open and vendor-neutral project with a diverse community of contributors from large corporations down to small companies and even individual developers . This diverse and steadily growing community is a stable base for the ongoing development of additional features and maintenance of existing functionality based on a broad and balanced view of the requirements put forward by the Theia adopters. The commercial-friendly licensing and the rigorous underlying IP management ensures that adopters can safely build commercial and internal products based on Theia. Project communication is open and transparent and welcomes new adopters by keeping the barriers of contribution as low as possible. Decisions in the project are based on the principle of meritocracy meaning that the weight of contributors in decisions is solely based on their achievements for the project as recognized by their peers. This provides an important incentive for contributors to make contributions. The open governance and diverse community of Theia is one of its strongest assets for its mid- to long-term evolution and viability.

Reviewer: minor: extra whitespace before the period:

`even individual developers .` > `even individual developers.`

```suggestion
Eclipse Theia is an open and vendor-neutral project with a diverse community of contributors from large corporations down to small companies and even individual developers. This diverse and steadily growing community is a stable base for the ongoing development of additional features and maintenance of existing functionality based on a broad and balanced view of the requirements put forward by the Theia adopters. The commercial-friendly licensing and the rigorous underlying IP management ensures that adopters can safely build commercial and internal products based on Theia. Project communication is open and transparent and welcomes new adopters by keeping the barriers of contribution as low as possible. Decisions in the project are based on the principle of meritocracy meaning that the weight of contributors in decisions is solely based on their achievements for the project as recognized by their peers. This provides an important incentive for contributors to make contributions. The open governance and diverse community of Theia is one of its strongest assets for its mid- to long-term evolution and viability.
```

## Reusable Common Tool Features

Theia optionally provides common tool features as components to be reused by adopters. Common features are generic so that may be reused in several tools. Examples for these common tool features include a file explorer, Git support and a code editor.

## Extensibility and Adaptability

Theia is an extensible and adaptable framework. Extensibility in this context means that you can easily add new features to a product built on the Theia platform (including UI and backend functionality). These new features can either be provided by the Theia project itself (common features), by other projects (e.g. Eclipse GLSP) or be custom features that are developed by an adopter. Adaptable in this context means that the workbench and all common features that are provided by the Theia project can be customized and adapted to project-specific needs. This includes changing or removing existing features and adjusting the look and feel.

## VS Code Compatibility

> Theia provides the ability to host VS Code extensions. This allows adopters to benefit from features that are provided as VS Code extensions and make them part of their tool offering. It also allows end users of Theia-based tools to install additional features, if the adopter providing a tool allows users to do so. When applicable, the default Theia UX aligns with the VS Code UI, although adopters can deviate from this.

Reviewer 4: Is open-vsx worth mentioning?

## Use Standards And Don’t Reinvent The Wheel

> Theia uses/reuses industrial standard technologies and practices whenever applicable. This keeps the scope of the project minimal and decreases the maintenance cost. This applies to the use of frameworks and development tools as well as to general concepts such as UX.

Reviewer 4: Could use the debug adapter protocol and LSP as examples here?
